Add draft post "Operator Constraints" (#1)
Merovius/website-review: content/posts/draft-operator-constraints.markdown

---
date: "2022-05-16 17:11:00"
title: "Operator constraints in Go"
---

Let's say you want to implement a sorting function in Go. Or perhaps a data
structure like a
[binary search tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_search_tree),
providing ordered access to its elements. Because you want your code to be
re-usable and type safe, you want to use type parameters. So you need a way to
order user-provided types.

There are multiple methods of doing that, with different trade-offs. Let's talk
about four in particular here:

1. `constraints.Ordered`
2. A method constraint
3. Taking a comparison function
4. Comparator types

I believe the fourth is a novel idea. At least I don't think I have seen it
come up in a discussion about Go so far. Though I think I have seen it used in

> other languages.

Reviewer: This paragraph feels a bit out of place here. Maybe move it to the comparator types section?

Author: The rationale of that sentence is to entice people to continue reading til the end - that is, I don't want them to open the post and think "okay, same old" and close it again. At the same time, that section must be at the end, so it is clear what it's trying to "fix".

That is, if this reads strange, I'd just remove it. But I'd like some way to make sure the reader gets to that section. Any ideas?

Reviewer: I thought about this again after reading the post and I changed my mind - it is nice to whet the readers appetite.

## `constraints.Ordered`

> Go 1.18 has a mechanism to constraint a type parameter to all types which have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go 1.18 has a mechanism to constrain a type parameter to all types which have
```

the `<` operator defined on them. The types which have this operator are
exactly all types whose underlying type is `string` or one of the predeclared
integer and float types. So we can write a type set expressing that:

```go
type Integer interface {

>   ~int | ~int8 | ~int16 | ~int32 | ~int64 | ~uint | ~uint8 | ~uint16 | ~uint32 | ~uint64 | ~uintptr

Reviewer: The syntax highlighting on your page makes this look pretty ugly 😬.

Author: [Yeah, I know](https://twitter.com/TheMerovius/status/1526285257942638594). I should use a custom syntax highlighting color scheme that is less garish.

Author: Changed the syntax highlighting to be differently ugly.

`constraints.Ordered` is simple, but it also is inflexible.

## Method constraints

We can use method constraints to allow more flexibility. This allows a user to
implement whatever sorting order they want as a method on their type.

We can write that constraint like this:

```go
type Lesser[T any] interface {
  // Less returns if the receiver is less than v.
  Less(v T) bool
}
```

The type parameter is necessary because we have to refer to the receiver type
itself in the `Less` method. This is hopefully clearer when we look at how this
is used:

```go
func Sort[T Lesser[T]](s []T) {
  // …
}

func SearchTree[T Lesser[T]](s []T) {
  // …
}
```

This allows the user of our library to customize the sorting order by defining
a new type with a `Less` method:

```go
type ReverseInt int

func (i ReverseInt) Less(j ReverseInt) bool {
  return j < i // order is reversed
}
```

The disadvantage of this is that it requires some boiler plate on part of your
user. Using a custom sorting order always requires defining a type with a method.

They can't use your code with predeclared types like `int` or `string` but
always have to wrap it into a new type.

> Likewise, if a type already has a natural comparison method but it is not

Reviewer: This comma feels out of place when the sentence is so short. Either remove the comma or merge the first and second sentence.
```suggestion
Likewise if a type already has a natural comparison method but it is not
```

```go
func main() {
  a := []time.Time{ /* … */ }
  Sort(a, time.Time.Before)
}
```

There is also no boilerplate needed to customize sorting behavior:

```go
func main() {
  a := []int{42,23,1337}
  Sort(a, func(i, j int) bool {
    return j < i // reversed order
  })
}
```

And you can provide helpers for common customizations:

```go
func Reversed[T any](less func(T, T) bool) (greater func(T, T) bool) {
  return func(a, b T) bool { return less(b, a) }
}
```

This approach is arguably also more correct than the one above because it
decouples the type from the comparison used. If I use a `SearchTree` as a set
datatype, there is no real reason why the elements in the set would be specific
to the comparison used. It should be “a set of `string`” not “a set of
`MyCustomlyOrderedString`”. This reflects the fact that with the method
constraint, we have to convert back-and-forth when putting things into the
container or taking it out again.

The main *disadvantage* of this approach is that it means you can not have
useful zero values. Your `SearchTree` type needs the `Less` field to be
populated to work. So its zero value can not be used to represent an empty set.

> You can not even lazily initialize it (which is a common trick to make types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You cannot even lazily initialize it (which is a common trick to make types
```
Or `can't`

```go
// Comparator is a helper type used to compare two T values.
type Comparator[T any] interface {
  ~struct{}
  Less(a, b T) bool
}

func Sort[C Comparator[T], T any](a []T) {
  var c C
  less := c.Less // has type func(T, T) bool
  // …
}

type SearchTree[C Comparator[T], T any] struct {
  // …
}
```

The `~struct{}` constraints any implementation of `Comparator[T]` to have
underlying type `struct{}`. It is not strictly necessary, but it serves two
purposes here:

1. It makes clear that `Comparator[T]` itself is not supposed to carry any
   state. It only exists to have its method called.
2. It ensures (as much as possible) that the zero value of `C` is safe to use.
   In particular, `Comparator[T]` would be a normal interface type. And it
   would have a `Less` method of the right type, so it would implement itself.
   But a zero `Comparator[T]` is `nil` and would always panic, if its method is
   called.

You can again provide helpers. This can also be used to combine this approach
with the above ones:

```go
type LessOperator[T constraints.Ordered] struct{}

func (LessOperator[T]) Less(a, b T) bool {
  return a < b
}

> type LessMethod[T Lesser[T]] struct{}

Reviewer: Would it be worth defining the `Lesser` interface too?

Author: I was trying to implicitly refer back to the one used in the second section. Maybe that's not clear, but I think I'm fine with that.

func (LessMethod[T]) Less(a, b T) bool {
  return a.Less(b)
}

type Reversed[C Comparator[T], T any] struct{}

func (Reversed[C, T]) Less(a, b T) bool {
  var c C
  return c.Less(b, a)
}

> ```

Reviewer: Is it possible to define a helper that takes a less function literal?

Author: Unfortunately no. Its zero value would not be callable. I will add a sentence to be explicit.

can be used directly, without extra initialization.

It also carries over the advantage of decoupling the comparison from the
element type, which we got from accepting comparison functions.

One disadvantage is that the comparator can never be inferred. It always has to
be specified in the instantiation explicitly[^1]. That's similar to how we
always had to pass a `less` function explicitly above.

[^1]: Though as we put the `Comparator[T]` type parameter first, we can infer
      `T` from the `Comparator`.

Another disadvantage is that this *always* requires defining a type for
comparisons. Where with the comparison function we could define customizations
(like reversing the order) inline with a `func` literal, this mechanism always
requires a method.

Lastly, this is arguably too clever for its own good. Understanding the purpose
and idea behind the `Comparator` type is likely to trip up your users when
reading the documentation.

## Summary

We are left with these trade-offs:

|| `constraints.Ordered` | `Lesser[T]` | `func(T,T) bool` | `Comparator[T]` |
|--------------------------|----|--------|----|----|

> | Predeclared types        | 👍 | 👎     | 👎 | 👎 |

Reviewer: The thumbs up and down are hard to differentiate on your page, maybe use ✅ and ❌?

Author: The checkmark and cross read as "yes or no" to me, while the thumbs read as "good or bad". That is, using the thumbs saves the extra step of having to decode which is "better". For example, for "Predeclared types" a "yes" is better, while for "type boilerplate" a "no" is better.

Alternatively, I would have to find phrasings for every line which mean "yes is always better", which also have to be short enough. I failed at that, myself :)
